Add the 2024 SSWG update blog post (#576)
apple/swift-org-website: _posts/2024-02-01-sswg-update-2024.md

---
layout: post
published: false
date: 2024-03-01 10:00:00
title: SSWG 2024 Annual Update
author: [Joannis, ktoso, FranzBusch]
---

In this yearly post, the Swift Server WorkGroup (SSWG) reflects on the community, ecosystem wide accomplishments and the WorkGroup's focus areas for the year ahead.

Since our [previous update post](/blog/sswg-update-2023/), Swift on the Server has continued to mature.

> 

Author: The survey was done halfway through last year

Let's start with a review of the progress made in 2023, before looking at the next steps in 2024.

# 2023 in Review

## Continued focus on growing the ecosystem

> The SSWG has continued to focus on growing the ecosystem by incubating packages and providing guidance to package authors. We've seen a lot of new, in development and improved packages this year. One example of a new packages is `swift-memcache-gsoc` which was developed as part of last years Google summer of code. The wire protocol and higher level connection APIs are done. The remaining work is implementing a connection pool and key sharding. The SSWG is looking forward to continued work on this package.

Reviewer: in development -> in-development
of a new packages -> of a new package
`swift-memcache-gsoc` -> `swift-memcache-gsoc`,
last years Google summer of code -> last year's Google Summer of Code
higher level -> higher-level

Reviewer 2: @Joannis and let's link to this year's edition https://www.swift.org/gsoc2024/

## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

> We've seen a lot of progress on the adoption of Structured Concurrency. Most new libraries are adopting it, and we're working on a guide to help existing libraries adopt it as well. Two big drivers of Structured Concurrency in the ecosystem have been SwiftNIO's introduction of `NIOAsyncChannel` and the `ServiceGroup` of the rewritten ServiceLifecycle package. Together we see both of them as foundational pieces for higher level libraries to build their logic using Structured Concurrency.  For example Hummingbird and GRPC are currently being rewritten from the ground up using those two building blocks.

Reviewer: higher level -> higher-level
example -> example,

## Tooling Improvements

Tooling has seen some tremendous improvements in 2023. We've seen the introduction of Swiftly, Dependabot for Swift and Chiseled Containers.

> In addition, thanks to the introduction of Package Plugins, we've seen the OpenAPI Generator make an entry. This plugin allows you to generate Swift boilerplate code from an OpenAPI specification. This is a great way for building both HTTP clients and servers.

Reviewer: for building -> to build

  
## Server Community Survey

> For the first time, we did run a developer community survey, aimed at collecting feedback and information about the shape and breadth of the Swift Server ecosystem.

Reviewer: did run -> ran

We received a huge amount of responses, for which we'd like to thank everyone! 

> We analyzed the responses and used them to how we're doing with current efforts, and help direct the group's goals and efforts in the upcoming year (see below).

Reviewer: and used them to how -> and used them to figure out how

Missing some info there

> For example, while the majority of respondents already use Swift Concurrency, there remain challanges in some areas with adoption. 

Reviewer: challanges -> challenges

> Among the highlights that shaped our goals for the next year were: a huge interest in standardized tooling for e.g. swift-format, as well as sourcekit-lsp and various IDEs.

Reviewer: were: a -> were a

We highly encourage you to have a look at the full [SSWG Community Survey 2024 Report](http://TODO), over on the Swift forums!

## New Members

> Since our update post of 2023, [Sven A. Schmidt](https://github.com/finestructure) has joined the workgroup. Sven has already been involved with the documentation workgroup, and is known for his work on Swift Package Index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since our update post of 2023, [Sven A. Schmidt](https://github.com/finestructure) has joined the workgroup. Sven has already been involved with the documentation workgroup, and is known for his work on the [Swift Package Index](https://swiftpackageindex.com).
```

# Ecosystem

Last year, we've seen seven new packages enter the SSWG incubation process. A tremendous amount of work has been done on these packages, showing how rapidly the ecosystem is expanding.

> - **Swift Distributed Actors (Cluster)** was accepted in January 2023. This package allows you to write peer-to-peer clusters in Swift, using distributed actors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Swift Distributed Actors (Cluster)** was accepted in January 2023. This package enables writing peer-to-peer clusters in Swift using distributed actors.
```

- **Cassandra Client** was accepted in February 2023, providing a Swift client for Apache Cassandra.
- **SQLiteNIO** was accepted in September 2023. This package provides an SQLite driver for Swift, and is commonly used through Vapor's Fluent ORM.

> - **Swift Service Context** and  **Swift Distributed Tracing** were accepted in October 2023. These packages enable distributed tracing for Swift. Rounding out the three pillars of observability.

Reviewer: Swift. Rounding -> Swift, rounding

> - **DiscordBM** was accepted in October 2023. DiscirdBM is a Swift client for Discord's Bot API, and is used in Vapor's Penny bot.

Reviewer: DiscirdBM is -> DiscordBM is

> - **DiscordBM** was accepted in October 2023. DiscirdBM is a Swift client for Discord's Bot API, and is used in Vapor's Penny bot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **DiscordBM** was accepted in October 2023. DiscordBM is a Swift client for Discord's Bot API, and is the foundation of Vapor's Penny bot.
```

> - **Swift OpenAPI Generator** was also accepted in October 2023, providing a Swift code generator for OpenAPI specifications, allowing you to generate both servers and clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Swift OpenAPI Generator** was also accepted in October 2023, providing a Swift code generator for OpenAPI specifications and enabling generation of both servers and clients.
```

In addition, **MongoKitten** was pitched and approved at the start of 2024. MongoKitten is a popular MongoDB driver for Swift.

# Goals for 2024

## Preparing for Swift 6

> In preparation for Swift 6, we'll be looking at the impact of the strict concurrency checking across the server ecosystem. We are planning to enable strict checking on every incubated package and make each package compile warning free under the strict checking rules.

Reviewer: the strict -> strict
warning free -> warning-free

> ## Adoption of Structured Concurrency

Reviewer 2: @Joannis how about we state this as sswg maintained libs being expressed in surface APIs in concurrency concepts. Compatibility with service lifecycle etc?

> Adoption of Structured Concurrency has been going strong but the journey isn't finished. In the coming year, we'll be focusing on adopting Structured Concurrency in even more libraries with the goal of making SwiftNIO an implementation detail of more and more libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Adoption of Structured Concurrency has been going strong, but the journey isn't finished. In the coming year, we'll be focusing on adopting Structured Concurrency in even more libraries, with the goal of making SwiftNIO an implementation detail of more and more libraries.
```

> In addition to working on libraries, we are also planning to work on more guides for developers of libraries and applications on how they can adopt Structured Concurrency and what benefits it brings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to working on libraries, we are also planning work on more guides for developers of libraries and applications, describing how to adopt Structured Concurrency and the benefits it brings.
```

## Standardised HTTP Server and Middlewares

> In 2023, we've extensively prepared for a standardised HTTP server and middlewares. The in progress, Hummingbird rewrite is already taking advantage of the new HTTP types. The goal for 2024 is to produce a low-level general purpose HTTP server package.

Reviewer: in progress, -> in-progress
general purpose -> general-purpose

> In 2023, we've extensively prepared for a standardised HTTP server and middlewares. The in progress, Hummingbird rewrite is already taking advantage of the new HTTP types. The goal for 2024 is to produce a low-level general purpose HTTP server package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 2023, we've extensively prepared for a standardised HTTP server and middlewares. The in-progress Hummingbird rewrite is already taking advantage of the new HTTP types. The goal for 2024 is to produce a low-level, general-purpose HTTP server package.
```

## Marketing Swift on the Server

> Marketing Swift on the Server is a big focus area for 2024. With the introduction of the redesigned navigation of the [swift.org](swift.org) website, we'll be able to better showcase Swift on the Server. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Marketing Swift on the Server is a big focus area for 2024. With the introduction of the redesigned navigation of the [swift.org](https://swift.org/) website, we'll be better able to showcase Swift on the Server. 
```

> We're looking to create more content for the ecosystem, such as integrated example projects and showcases of Swift-Server projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're looking to create more content for the ecosystem, such as integrated example projects and showcases of existing server-focused projects.
```

---
layout: post
published: false
date: 2024-03-01 10:00:00
title: SSWG 2024 Annual Update
author: [Joannis, ktoso, FranzBusch]

> ]

Reviewer 4: Nit: extra ]

> ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Tooling Improvements

Tooling has seen some tremendous improvements in 2023. We've seen the introduction of Swiftly, Dependabot for Swift and Chiseled Containers.

In addition, thanks to the introduction of Package Plugins, we've seen the OpenAPI Generator make an entry. This plugin allows you to generate Swift boilerplate code from an OpenAPI specification. This is a great way for building both HTTP clients and servers.
  
## Server Community Survey

For the first time, we did run a developer community survey, aimed at collecting feedback and information about the shape and breadth of the Swift Server ecosystem.
We received a huge amount of responses, for which we'd like to thank everyone! 

We analyzed the responses and used them to how we're doing with current efforts, and help direct the group's goals and efforts in the upcoming year (see below).
For example, while the majority of respondents already use Swift Concurrency, there remain challanges in some areas with adoption. 
Among the highlights that shaped our goals for the next year were: a huge interest in standardized tooling for e.g. swift-format, as well as sourcekit-lsp and various IDEs.

> We highly encourage you to have a look at the full [SSWG Community Survey 2024 Report](http://TODO), over on the Swift forums!

Reviewer 2: TODO: When we're ready to post I will make the forums post and then we merge the blog

## New Members

Since our update post of 2023, [Sven A. Schmidt](https://github.com/finestructure) has joined the workgroup. Sven has already been involved with the documentation workgroup, and is known for his work on Swift Package Index.

# Ecosystem

Last year, we've seen seven new packages enter the SSWG incubation process. A tremendous amount of work has been done on these packages, showing how rapidly the ecosystem is expanding.

> - **Swift Distributed Actors** was accepted in January 2023. This package allows you to write peer-to-peer clusters in Swift, using distributed actors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Swift Distributed Actors (Cluster)** was accepted in January 2023. This package allows you to write peer-to-peer clusters in Swift, using distributed actors.
```

- **Cassandra Client** was accepted in February 2023, providing a Swift client for Apache Cassandra.
- **SQLiteNIO** was accepted in September 2023. This package provides an SQLite driver for Swift, and is commonly used through Vapor's Fluent ORM.
- **Swift Service Context** and  **Swift Distributed Tracing** were accepted in October 2023. These packages enable distributed tracing for Swift. Rounding out the three pillars of observability.
- **DiscordBM** was accepted in October 2023. DiscirdBM is a Swift client for Discord's Bot API, and is used in Vapor's Penny bot.
- **Swift OpenAPI Generator** was also accepted in October 2023, providing a Swift code generator for OpenAPI specifications, allowing you to generate both servers and clients.

> In addition, **MongoKitten** was pitched and approved at the start of 2024. MongoKitten is a popular MongoDB driver for Swift.

Reviewer 4: You may call me selfish but i'd wish the starting package names were masked links, not just bold texts 👀.

Nit: `DiscirdBM` -> `DiscordBM`

Author: I'm all for that idea as well. Would that point to spi or github?

Reviewer 4: I don't have a strong preference so both would be fine.
Github's UI looks more polished and more familiar to me, while SPI provides nice extra info about packages too. So both have their advantages. I'd just go with whatever is the theme right now when linking to packages in Swift.org posts.

Reviewer 5: I suggest linking to GitHub repositories, as in the future we may want to consider packages that do not have a presence on SPI, or whose information on SPI may be inaccurate or out of date.
